[SQUEAKING]
[CLICKING]
[RUSTLING]
LAWRENCE GUTH: So last
time we talked about
the Szemerédi-Trotter theorem.
And today I want to do some
digesting of what we learned.
So on the one hand, the
Szemerédi-Trotter theorem had
a lot of impact, both the
theorem and the proof.
And the proof involved topology.
And that started a whole
thing of using topology
and combinatorics.
And Tom Wolff learned about it.
The Fourier analyst Tom
Wolff learned about it.
And he brought the
cell decompositions
and those topological
methods into Fourier analysis
and had a lot of impact.
And the theorem itself,
the statement is sharp,
and the proof is fairly short.
So it's really nice.
But there are some questions
that are closely related
to the Szemerédi-Trotter theorem
that the proof doesn't actually
tell us anything about.
And so I wanted to go through
them today and discuss
why the proof doesn't
tell us much about some
of these related things.
And some of those things
will be the main topics
of the class going forward.
OK.
So, I'm going to put on the
board Szemerédi-Trotter theorem
and proof are quite remarkable.
But they don't tell us anything
about some questions that
seem closely related.
OK.
So number one, doesn't tell us
anything about projection theory
in finite fields.
OK.
Number two, it doesn't tell us
anything about the structure
of sharp examples.
All right.
So we discussed a
little bit last class.
I mentioned the sharp examples
for the Szemerédi-Trotter
theorem that we know.
And it's an
interesting question.
If you have an example that
is close to being sharp
for the Szemerédi-Trotter
theorem,
can we say anything
about its structure?
And it might be a
little surprising,
but the proof of the
Szemerédi-Trotter theorem really
gives no information about that.
And we'll talk about why.
OK.
Number three.
So the Szemerédi-Trotter theorem
is the sharp theorem about
projection theory for sets of
points in the Euclidean plane
in R2, finite sets in R2.
So you might hope
that it would tell you
something helpful about
projection theory for sets
of unit balls in R2.
But it says rather
little about that.
So it says rather little
about the projection
theory of unit balls in R2
with some spatial conditions.
So I'll put here with
the Hausdorff spacing.
So this is also a
little bit surprising.
And so Tom Wolff was really
interested in analysis problems,
problems like this.
And he found the
Szemerédi-Trotter proof
in the combinatorics literature,
which at that time were like two
pretty different groups
of mathematicians.
And he imported it, and he tried
to use it to answer questions
like this.
And he did prove a bunch
of interesting stuff,
but he was not able to
answer this question.
And so we'll talk about
what the issue is,
why the Szemerédi-Trotter proof
does not say all that much about
this set.
OK.
Cool.
And then going forward,
this and this, maybe this
are going to be some of the
main topics of our class.
OK.
Oh yeah.
And so let me also mention one
of the big developments that
made me excited to teach the
class is that there is now
a sharp theorem about this
proven by Orponen and Shmerkin
and Ren and Wang, and actually
doesn't use any of the methods
from the
Szemerédi-Trotter proof.
So anyway, so we'll talk
today to explain why
something different is needed.
And then we'll meet
the something different
starting next class.
OK.
All right.
So why does the method
that we saw-- yeah?
AUDIENCE: Are there
any other spaces
other than real space
where a similar--
not actually the
technical wheels,
plates, but in other words?
I know that it doesn't just
move over a finite [INAUDIBLE].
Is there anything that's kind of
similar enough to the real thing
before?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
OK, so the question is the key
ingredient in the proof we did
of the Szemerédi-Trotter theorem
is this cell decomposition
lemma.
You can cut the plane
up into pieces in a way
so that each line doesn't
go through too many pieces.
And the question
was, other than R2,
are there some other spaces
where something like this
would work?
OK.
So it works, at
least to some extent,
in higher dimensions, Rn.
It doesn't make any
sense over Fp, which as I
was going to say in a second.
And it works with some
modifications in Cn.
And yeah, and those are
all the spaces, really,
I know where it works.
OK.
So we just mentioned.
So why did these methods
not work over Fp?
Well, we had this basic thing
of cutting a space into pieces
where the simplest
thing would be like,
you take a line in the
plane and it cuts it
into two connected components.
And that just doesn't
make sense in Fp2.
If you remove a line
from Fp2, there's
no sense in which
what's left over
is organized into
two components.
OK.
So this one is not
that surprising.
And these are a little
more surprising.
And we think we need to
talk in some more depth
to explain why we didn't
learn anything about them.
OK.
All right.
So first we'll talk about the
structure of sharp examples
for the ST theorem.
And let me first remind you
what the ST theorem says,
and what are the sharp examples.
So the theorem was this.
So I have a set X is a set
of points in the plane,
and L is the set of
lines in the plane.
And then we're going to count
the incidences between them.
The theorem says that the number
of incidences between X and L
is bounded by the number of
points plus the number of lines,
plus a more complicated term.
And I will just label these
terms I and II and III.
OK.
So the situation where term I
dominates is easy to imagine.
We just need to put
each point on a line.
So I'll draw some lines.
And then each point I will
put on one of these lines.
OK.
So this type of example I
would describe as not having
any remarkable structure.
So this is not rigid.
And there are many
degrees of freedom.
So I would say no
special structure here.
It's not rigid.
There are many
degrees of freedom.
Each one of these points I can
slide freely along this line.
So I have at least X
degrees of freedom.
All right.
Now, example.
The situation
where II dominates,
the picture is a little bit
different but it's similar.
So to have L incidences,
I just need that each line
goes through a point.
So there's a few points.
I put them anywhere.
And then I'm going
to draw my lines,
and each line will go
through one of these points.
So it just looks like-- whoops.
Looks like that.
Sometimes called
the stars example.
OK.
And again, there's
no special structure.
It's not rigid.
There are many
degrees of freedom.
I can rotate this
line, and so on.
OK.
And then example III,
when this term dominates,
those are harder to come by,
and they have more structure,
and they're more interesting.
So the known examples
are an integer grid.
Integer grid.
Or instead of the integers,
you could take a ring,
like a ring in a number field.
This kind of grid.
Or more generally, you
could take an R grid
where R is the ring of
integers in a number field.
OK.
Let me draw a little picture.
All right.
So this is the scenario
where the known
examples have structure.
So we have structure
in the known examples.
And we have very few
degrees of freedom
to perturb these examples.
Cool.
OK.
Are there any
questions or comments?
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: If you embed R2 into
the real projective plane,
there's a duality that takes
lines in the real projective
plane to points and
switches points with lines
and it preserves intersections.
And it seems to me like the
first two classes of example
are kind of dual
when you do that.
Is the third class
of examples like,
self-dual if you do that kind
of switching lines and points?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
OK.
That's a great question.
Let me just repeat
it for everybody.
So there's a structure
called point-line duality.
So.
That's probably
nicest to explain it
in the projector space.
But let me say it
in a lowbrow way.
So if I have a line
y, I can probably
write it as y equals mx plus b.
In other words-- and let me do
this is a little [INAUDIBLE]
but I'm going to write
it as mx minus b.
Why not?
So in other words, the line is
0 equals mx minus b minus y.
So if I have a set of points,
it would be x1, y1, xN, yN.
Just add Points.
If I have a set of lines, they
might be m1, b1, and then mL bL
if I had L lines.
And if I want to
count incidences,
I consider a different
point, different line,
and I check this equation.
And this equation is
actually symmetric
if you switch the role
of mb and the role of xy.
So I can turn my
points into lines
and turn my lines into points.
So this is a symmetric if I
take mb and switch it with xy.
So as a student pointed out,
if you take this example,
and then you apply point-line
duality, you get this example.
So this line here
became that point.
These points became those lines.
And so on.
So these two examples
are dual to each other.
All right.
Now the question was,
if you take this example
and you apply point-line
duality, what do you get?
And you actually do get
something different.
So you can apply
point-line duality.
All right.
So to think about what would
happen if we did this--
I won't do it in
complete detail,
but let's take a first step.
So when I do that, each one of
these lines will become a point,
and the point will
be labeled like mb.
So the x-coordinate of our
point will be the slope.
So who are the slopes
of these lines?
Well, we constructed them.
The slopes were rational
numbers with small denominators.
So those will be
the x-coordinates.
They'll be rational numbers
with small denominators.
And then for each
x-coordinate, the y-coordinates
will be the different b values.
So the different places
where it hits the y-axis.
And you can compute
that with a little work.
And you get a set, which
is not a grid, actually.
It's not an integer grid.
So the set of rationals
with small denominators,
that's not integer
multiples of one number.
So it is actually a
genuinely different example
when you switch the
points and the lines.
Yeah.
So that's great.
And the other thing
we mentioned last time
is that you can apply
projective transformations.
OK.
So this list of examples
is a little bit messy.
There are few of them, but
it's a little bit messy,
and that perhaps has
contributed to making
it feel daunting to prove
that all of the examples
look like one of these.
OK.
Yeah, great.
Great question.
OK.
So next, I thought that we
would go over a bit the proof
of the Szemerédi-Trotter theorem
with an eye towards what does it
tell us about the structure
of sharp examples.
And unfortunately, we'll
see it tells us very little.
But it's good to see it.
OK.
So the first step in the proof
was a double counting argument.
And a double counting argument
proved a weaker upper bound
for the number of
incidences, which was this.
And that double
counting argument
has a corollary, which
is perhaps easier to say.
And the corollary is actually
the only thing you really need
to prove the
Szemerédi-Trotter theorem.
The corollary says that
if the number of lines
is more than the
number of points
squared, then the
number of incidences
is just bounded by the number of
lines, which is, in other words,
it matches the
case II over here.
The picture looks like this,
where a typical line just
goes through one of the points.
OK.
Cool.
So actually, I didn't
emphasize that last time,
but that's a nice thing to say
because this corollary is maybe
easier to hold in our mind
than whatever the exponents are
up there.
OK.
So now the next idea was
this cell decomposition idea.
So let me draw an example
for Szemerédi-Trotter,
and then I'll draw the
cell decomposition,
and we'll talk about
how it's helping us.
So I'll have a set
of points like that.
It might be an integer grid.
And then I have some lines here.
Lines at those slopes.
Lines at these slopes.
OK.
Et cetera.
And then we will do
a cell decomposition.
Those are our cells.
So our cell wall.
And here are our cells O sub i.
OK.
So let's say Xi is X
intersected with Oi,
and Li is the set of lines
so that L intersect Oy is not
empty.
OK.
And what we can do with
the cell decomposition
is that we choose our cell
decomposition fine enough.
So the cell decomposition
has a parameter S.
There's a parameter S. And
in terms of this parameter,
Xi is like X over S squared.
So you can think of there
being S squared cells,
and the points are
distributed evenly among them.
And Li is at most X over
S. And in sharp examples,
this would be an equality.
OK.
So what we do is we do the
cell decomposition fine
enough so that Li is
bigger than Xi squared.
And then we use the corollary.
OK.
So why does this not
help us very much?
Why does this not help very much
to understand the structure?
So what we've done here
is we've cut our original,
we've cut our space
into cells, and we're
going to look one
cell at a time.
In each cell, we see a ton of
lines and not that many points.
And then by double counting, we
can deduce that in each cell,
we have this bound.
So we use our
corollary that says
that the number of
incidences between Xi and Li
is at most around Li.
So within each
cell, a typical line
is only hitting one
point within the cell.
OK.
So this divide and
conquer argument,
we're cutting space
up into cells,
and then we're thinking
about them one at a time.
And doing that simplifies our
life because we have broken
our problem into
smaller problems,
and we just think about
them one at a time.
And we understand
each smaller problem
well enough to bound the
total number of incidences.
But we are not paying attention
to any possible interaction
between these cells.
And the structure is all
about the interaction
between the cells.
So a given line in
our story is actually
appearing in many
different cells.
And so there's some
relationship between what's
going on in this cell and
what's going on in that cell.
And in our proof, we're not
trying to understand or exploit
that relationship.
We're just looking at
the cells one at a time.
Anyway.
So the only structure
that the proof
gives us is that within each
cell, you see some points,
and you see some lines, and
each line only goes through one
point within the
cell, which is not yet
a rigid structure at all.
And that's all that
the proof gives us.
Any questions or
comments about that?
Cool.
So I have been wondering
about this question
of structure of sharp examples.
And I thought of a direction
that people are interested,
people could pursue
as a project.
And I wanted to
put it out there.
So take 10 or 15 minutes
to share a project
idea of some smaller
problems that might build up
towards understanding this.
So here was my thought.
So first of all, this
general incidence theorem
implies a projection theorem.
The projection theorem
is more specialized.
And I think it might be easier
to understand the sharp examples
for the projection theorem.
OK.
So I called it a
theorem last time.
We could also call
it a corollary.
So X is contained in
R2 as a finite set.
D is a set of directions.
And then S of XD is
the maximum over all
of the directions of the
size of pi theta of X.
And the way I've
stated the theorem
before is that the number
of directions is at most 1
plus S squared over the number
of points, but algebraically,
it's equivalent to say
the following thing.
If the number of
directions is at least 2,
then S is at least X to
the 1/2 D to the 1/2.
That's just algebra.
The case where the number
of directions is just 1
is not very interesting.
If you're only projecting
in one direction,
it could easily happen that the
projection has only one point.
OK.
So this is a very
special case of this.
In this case, what
are the lines?
The set of lines are
all of the lines that
are in these directions and
pass through at least one
of these points.
So that's a very particular
way of choosing the lines.
And there are not as
many sharp examples.
So taking one of
these grids and then
taking a set of
directions that are
rational numbers with small
numerators and denominators,
that's a sharp example for this.
I think if you apply
point-line duality,
that it's still a sharp
example for Szemerédi-Trotter,
but I don't think it is a
projection example anymore.
So let's see.
So being a projection example
means that for every point,
all of the lines going through
it have the same set of slopes.
Those are the directions
we're projecting.
So if I applied
point-line duality, that
would mean that for
every line, the set
of x-coordinates where
it intersects a point
would be the same.
And that's not true here.
Maybe it's better you
may check on your own.
But so I claim if you
apply point-line duality,
you don't anymore have an
example with this projection
structure.
Also, if you apply a
projective transformation,
then you will ruin the fact that
there were parallel lines here.
So the directions, after
projective transformation,
the lines that used to
point in the same direction
won't point in the
same direction anymore.
So that won't be a
projective example either.
So the class of
known sharp examples
is smaller, which makes it a
little more hopeful that we
could understand it.
It is actually just
grids over number fields.
OK.
Now, once we set the
problem up this way,
you could imagine fixing
the set D in advance,
and then just for that
set of projections,
considering different sets
X and seeing what happens.
And so you get, actually,
lots of different problems
depending on what set
of directions you fix.
So let's write that down.
All right.
So for any set D,
S sub D of N would
be the minimum over any
set of N points of SXD,
which, remember what that is.
So it's the minimum
over any set of points
of the maximum over these
different projections of pi
theta of x.
OK.
So, yeah.
So in my opinion, for any
set D that you write down,
it's interesting to
try to estimate this.
So now we have lots
and lots of questions.
And most of those
questions have not
been investigated all that much.
OK.
Now, in the sharp examples
that we know about,
who is D. In the
known sharp examples,
the set D is rational
numbers with small numerators
and denominators, or rational
fractions in some other ring.
So this is a ring of
integers in a number field.
And then I'll say this just more
informally, a and b are small.
So maybe the number fields
are things of the form a1
plus square root of 2, a2, and
a1 and a2 are small integers.
So in all the known
sharp examples,
these are the sets
of directions,
and they have quite a lot
of algebraic structure.
And so we could
ask the question,
if we fix a set of
directions that does not
have so much
algebraic structure,
then can we get a
better estimate?
All right.
OK.
So let's think about--
we begin with the simplest
problem that we can.
So let's take just
a few directions--
two directions, three
directions, four directions.
All right.
So RMK, there is some linear
transformation symmetry
in this problem.
All right.
So if I start with the
configuration of points
and some directions, I can apply
a linear change of variables
to R2.
I'll get a new
configuration of points
and I'll get some
new directions,
but it'll be the same problem,
just in new coordinates.
So up to symmetry, if you
take just three directions,
then there's only one
choice up to symmetry.
So the set of directions--
ah, OK, actually, let
me say something else.
So OK.
So up to symmetry, if
there are three directions,
then there's only one choice.
OK.
Let me make a comment about how
to write down the directions.
I actually already was using it
without explaining it properly.
So this is the list of
slopes of the directions.
So OK.
So let's describe
our projections
as pi t key of X1 and X2
is X1 plus t times X2.
So for this investigation,
this t is more or less
the slope of the projection, and
that is a more convenient thing
to talk about than
the angle in radians.
And that was what we
were writing up here.
OK.
So, cool.
So for example, pi 0 of
x1x2 would just be x1.
And the other
simplest projection
would be just to take x2.
And that doesn't quite
fit into this notation.
But there's a convention that
we'll call that pi infinity.
Pi infinity of x1x2 is just x2.
And then all the other ones
will be t will be a real number.
OK.
So if D equals 3, then
without loss of generality,
D might be 0, 1, and infinity.
OK.
All right.
So let me copy down what the
Szemerédi-Trotter theorem says
for comparison.
It says for any set D, S of D
of N is at least D to the 1/2 N
to the 1/2 as long as there
are at least two points in D.
So if D is 0, 1, infinity,
or any set of three slopes,
because it's all the
same, this is sharp.
For instance, you could
take an N by N integer grid,
or N to the 1/2 by N to
the 1/2 integer grid.
So there's nothing new
for three directions.
Let's go to four directions.
By using our symmetry, we can
arrange that the first three
directions are 0,
1, and infinity,
and there'll be a
fourth direction, t.
And t could be any real number.
So we have one degree
of freedom how we
would choose four directions.
OK.
And the one extreme, we could
choose t to be like 1/2 or 2.
And so this would be
rational with a small size.
And then the other
extreme, we could
say that t might be a
transcendental number.
And somewhere in the middle
we would have root 2,
or a big rational number, like
1,000 or something like that.
Now in this case,
the theorem is sharp.
So the example that we have
with four directions, the four
directions would be these.
And in this case, it's a
question what would happen.
So let me write a
specific question.
So question.
So if D is 0, 1, infinity, and
t, where t is transcendental,
then is it true that SD of N
is bounded by N to the 1/2?
So it's at least N to the 1/2.
If the theorem is sharp,
it would be approximately N
to the 1/2.
But if the theorem is not
sharp and we can improve it,
it might be bigger than this.
My best guess is that
it's bigger than this.
And I played around a
little bit with examples.
And I can show you the best
example that I can find.
OK.
So example.
Let me say that PKS is
the set of polynomials
in this transcendental number t.
So a0 plus a1t plus aK
minus 1 t to the K minus 1.
So they are degree
K polynomials.
And the a's are integers,
and they have size up to S.
So let's say this.
So that guy is going to play
the role like integers from 1
up to S, and that
would have worked well
if we had a rational slope.
So now our set S is going
to be PKS times PKS.
K and S, of course,
are parameters.
So we can play with them
and see what's optimal.
So the size of X is S to the 2K.
Besides, if this
thing is S to the K,
we have K choices and S
choices for each of ai.
OK.
Now what happens
when we project X?
Pi 0 of X projection onto the
first coordinate is just PKS,
and pi infinity
of X is projection
onto the second coordinate.
That's just PKS.
Those are quite small.
Best we could hope for, really.
Now, what is pi 1 of X?
Pi 1 of X is I take
an element of here
and I add it to an
element of here.
So I'm going to add
this set to itself.
When I take two of
these polynomials
and add them together,
I get a new polynomial,
and I just add the coefficients.
So the the constant coefficient
was between 0 and S minus 1,
and I add up two of those.
The sum is between
0 and 2S, basically.
So pi 1 of X is
contained in PK comma 2S.
And it's pretty
much equal to that.
All right.
Now, what happens
if I take pi t of X?
Well, pi t of X means I'm going
to take X1, which is in here,
and I'm going to add
it to t times X2.
X2 lives in here.
I'm going to multiply it
by t and add it to X1.
All right.
And this is the
most important one.
And these were designed to
make this reasonably small.
So what's going to happen?
Well, t times X2 is going to
be a polynomial like this,
but it will have degree
K instead of K minus 1.
And then I will add it to X1,
which is a polynomial like this.
When I put them together, I'll
get a polynomial of degree K,
and the coefficients
will be up to 2S.
So this is contained
in PK plus 1 2S.
And this one is the largest
of the four projections.
All right.
It's a bit smaller
than this, but I doubt
that it matters very much.
So let's just think of it
as being about this big.
All right.
So S is the size of
the biggest projection.
This one is the
biggest projection.
And that is roughly
2S to the K plus 1.
All right.
So let me digest
it a little bit.
It's 2 to the K plus 1.
The plus 1 doesn't
matter very much.
And then S, and then
S to the K. S to the K
is the square root of X.
That's what we're shooting for.
We're trying to get as close as
we can to the square root of X.
So 2 to the K is X to the 1/2.
And then there's an S here.
And the S is the size
of X to the 1 over 2K.
OK.
So I want to try to get
as close to this as I can.
So I want to
minimize this thing.
So now we're going to
choose K to minimize it.
K should also be an integer,
but that's not a big issue.
Cool.
OK.
Well, if I want to minimize
this product, at least roughly,
the thing to do is to make
this one equal to this one.
So let's set 2 to the K to be
equal to X to the 1 over 2K.
And now we'll solve for K.
First, I raise both
sides to the 2K power.
So I get 2 to the
2K squared is X.
Now I'll take the
logarithm of both sides.
So 2K squared is the
logarithm base 2 of X.
And now I'll solve
for K. And there's
some constants that let's
not worry about too much.
So K is equal to some constant
times the log of X to the 1/2.
So now how big was this thing?
It's either one of these
things are equal to each other,
and this one is maybe
easier to understand.
It's 2 to that.
So our S sub D of this set X is
like e to a constant log of X
to the 1/2 X to the 1/2.
Cool.
All right.
So asymptotically, as the
size of X goes to infinity,
this thing is smaller
than X to the 0.51.
But it's also, this thing
is bigger than any constant.
It is going to infinity.
So it's also not less
than x to the 1/2.
OK.
So this was just one
example, S sub D of N.
So this tells us that S sub D of
N is less than e to a constant
log of N to the
1/2 N to the 1/2.
And this by definition
is the minimum
over all the possible
sets X of size N.
And this was just one of them.
But I think it's plausible that
this is the one with smallest
projections.
OK.
So plausibly, that
gives a sense of how
things, for four
directions, how do
things change when you go from a
transcendental thing on the one
side to a very nice rational
slope on the other side.
OK.
Cool.
And that, I mean, that's of the
beginning of an investigation.
Of course, we could
have more directions.
And so we have many questions.
So four directions is
already complicated enough
to be interesting.
But wow, we could also
have many directions.
And so we would have
lots more questions.
So more questions.
So maybe D is 0, 1, and
infinity, and then a bunch
more directions.
So we have R directions.
And the sharp
example, these guys
were rational numbers, or
rational numbers in some field
with small heights.
The opposite of that
would be maybe t1 up to tR
are algebraically
independent over Q.
So they're each transcendental.
But even more than that,
there's no algebraic relation
among all of them.
This would be the most
transcendental situation.
So then how does this behave?
And then there's
stuff in the middle.
So maybe these guys could live
in a field extension of Q,
which is pretty complicated.
And so potentially, there
could be an interaction
between algebraic
number theory, where
it's a discipline
that describes who
are the field
extensions of Q. How
do you think about them
with projection theory?
So people coming into class
have different backgrounds.
I'm not sure if
there's anyone who
does number theory and
algebraic number theory.
But anyway, so this
is a possible project.
In the weeks ahead,
we'll be talking more
about different
types of projects.
And everybody can
pick out something
that they want to work on
for their final project
for the class.
Cool.
OK.
Any questions or
comments about this?
This is my stab at having some
warm-up questions that lead
towards thinking about the
structure of sharp examples
for Szemerédi-Trotter Trotter.
AUDIENCE: Or what
you're saying, you
expect that you can prove
something stronger for this case
where everything is
algebraically independent?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
If I had to guess--
so I think the question is,
what do I guess is true?
If I had to guess, I would
guess that there are-- sorry,
this should be S sub D of N.
There are much stronger lower
bounds for this than the
Szemerédi-Trotter theorem
if these are all transitive.
This is if there are no
algebraic relations there.
Yeah.
So for this setup,
you could make
a class of examples that
is kind of like this class.
But instead of having
polynomials in just one thing t,
there would be polynomials
in t1 up to tR.
And I don't know if you
could count the total degree,
or I'm not sure.
Anyway.
So there's some example you
could get your hands on.
And I think it's plausible
that that's the sharp example.
And that I think it's plausible
that the bounds are much
stronger than the general
Szemerédi-Trotter bound.
And I would be really
interested to--
or I could be wrong, also,
but I would be really
interested in either case.
OK.
So let's circle back
to our class outline.
So the Szemerédi-Trotter proof
doesn't tell us much about
projection theory
for finite fields.
We'll talk more about
that next class.
It doesn't tell us much about
the structure of sharp examples
for the Szemerédi-Trotter
theorem over the reals.
We just talked about that.
And it doesn't tell us very much
about projection theory for unit
balls.
So let's talk about this one.
This is perhaps the
central topic in our class.
And let's see what
the problem is,
why this complete, elegant
solution of the projection
problem for points in R2
doesn't tell us very much
about the projection problem
for unit balls in R2.
All right.
So first, let's recall
what is the projection
problem for unit balls, and
what is Hausdorff spacing.
All right.
So let's set up.
All right, let me write.
All right.
So X is now a set of unit balls
In the ball of radius R in R2.
And D is a set of directions.
So I'm going to think of it
as a subset of the circle.
And their directions
are 1 over R separated,
because otherwise they would
be equivalent from the point
of view of projecting
some unit balls in BR.
All right.
S of XD is the
largest projection.
All right.
And this symbol is
now doing double duty,
and we're thinking of it as
the length of the projection.
OK.
So we'd like to understand
how these things behave.
But besides looking at
the cardinality of X
and the cardinality
of D, we're also
going to pay attention
to their spacing.
So N sub X of r is
the maximum of X
intersected with a ball of
radius little r with any center.
So it's the maximum
over the center.
And N sub D over
rho is the maximum
of D intersect
gamma, where gamma
is an arc of length
rho in the circle.
So this describes how X and D
are packed at smaller scales,
or how they're spaced.
So Hausdorff
spacing means that X
is around R to the alpha for
some pre-parameter alpha,
and N sub X of little r
is bounded by little r
to the alpha.
That's Hausdorff spacing
for X. Hausdorff spacing
for the directions would
be the number of directions
is R to the beta, and ND
of little r over big R
is bounded by little
r to the beta.
So this informally says
that the balls of X
are not packed too much
into a smaller ball,
and the directions are
not packed too much
into a smaller direction, into
a small band of directions.
These exact conditions,
it's not the only conditions
one might be interested in.
It's not the only
spacing condition
that might be interesting
to think about,
but it's one of the
most popular ones.
And it has turned out that
the most interesting math
has come up by trying to
understand these conditions.
And they come up.
They come up naturally
in some points of view,
even though they're also--
I will argue that other
spacing conditions are
helpful to consider sometimes.
So that's Hausdorff spacing.
And the analog of the
Szemerédi-Trotter problem is
going to be try to understand
this if X and D have Hausdorff
spacing.
So question.
If X and D have
Hausdorff spacing--
wow, let me put up a conjecture,
which is even now a theorem--
then D is less S
squared over X plus 1.
So this was an old
conjecture, and now it's
a theorem proven by Orponen
and Shmerkin and Ren and Wang.
And it's totally analogous to
the Szemerédi-Trotter projection
theorem for finite point sets.
But the proof of the
Szemerédi-Trotter theorem
doesn't help very much
to prove this stuff.
OK.
So what goes wrong?
So let's try to use the
cell decomposition method.
So here's X.
Actually, let me
back up a second.
So to see what goes wrong, it
helps to remember how the cell
decomposition method worked for
the original Szemerédi-Trotter,
which we did go over.
But let me go over it in the
context of this projection
theorem.
And so you can see how it
looks there so that we'll
be able to compare.
All right.
I do realize that this is maybe
the third time that we have
outlined the proof of the
Szemerédi-Trotter theorem with
the cell decompositions,
but well,
really good pieces of math.
It's OK to see a few times.
All right.
So sketch of ST proof,
ST projection proof
using cell decompositions.
So we have a set X of points.
So here's X. And then
I cut it into cells.
And Xi is X intersect Oi.
I'm going to do my
cell decomposition.
And it has a parameter,
which I called S before,
but I'm going to
call it sigma now
because we have this other
letter S, and it gets confusing.
So the size of Xi is like
X over sigma squared.
OK.
Now, we're going to draw all
the-- so the set L, our lines,
are going to be all the lines
through x with a slope in D.
And when we just
look at this cell,
we're still doing
the projections
in all the same directions.
We have the same D.
OK.
Yeah.
Let me write down our--
So Di is the same as D. OK.
And then we have a double
counting observation.
And the double
counting observation
says that if the
number of directions
is bigger than the number
of points, maybe twice
the number of
points, then S should
be at least around
the number of points.
And the reason for that is
that if you have this many
directions, and the typical
point for most of the directions
you're projecting, it
cannot hit any other point.
So in most directions
when you project a point--
so we have this point.
We have a handful
of other points.
But then we're going to project
this point in many directions.
So there.
So let's say we
have more than twice
as many directions as points.
If I draw lines in these
different directions
through my base point,
most of those lines
won't hit any other point.
So when I look at
this projection,
this will be the
only point over here.
And so in this situation,
most of the time,
the points don't land
on top of each other
when you do projections.
And so this size
of the projection
is around the same as
the size of the set.
OK.
Great.
So now L are all of the lines
that go through X with slope
in D. And each line only
goes through a small fraction
of the cells.
So Li would be the lines
that go through Oi.
And for a typical cell, Li would
be smaller than L over sigma.
So now what we do is
we cut up our picture
into small enough cells
that in each cell,
the number of
directions is bigger
than the number of points.
So we choose sigma so that X
over sigma squared is smaller
than 1/2 of the
number of directions.
And so then we get that
Si is bigger than Xi,
which is X over sigma squared.
And from that, we can compute.
So let me say this.
So S, S times D is
the number of lines.
And that's bigger than sigma
times the number of lines
through a typical cell,
which is like sigma times
the number of directions
times the size of a projection
for a particular cell.
So then in each cell,
the number of lines
is the number of directions
times the size of a projection.
OK.
And Si is bigger than Xi.
So that's bigger than sigma
times D times X over sigma
squared.
So that's X times D over sigma.
And sigma is dictated here.
So if you plug in
the value of sigma,
you get that this is X
to the 1/2 D to the 3/2,
and you cancel the D's,
and that's the lower bound.
OK.
So algebra aside,
what is happening
is that we do this
cell decomposition,
and we cut things up finely
enough so that within this cell,
the number of
directions is bigger
than the number of
points in this cell.
Then we know that a typical line
only goes through one point.
And then we count everything up,
and Szemerédi-Trotter falls in.
What goes wrong when we try
to do this for unit balls?
So if the set X has an alpha
dimensional spacing condition,
then you should
visualize it as being
something like a Cantor set.
So I tried to draw that here.
So now we can partition it.
We do our cell decomposition.
We have sigma squared cells.
Sigma is a parameter.
So Xi is X intersected with Oi.
So here it is.
And well, we'd like to think
of this as a smaller version
of our original problem.
And our original problem
was about unit balls
in a bigger ball.
So actually, we need to know,
how big is this bigger ball?
Let's call it that a
ball of radius little r.
Now, it won't
necessarily happen.
We don't know for sure
that Xi is organized
into one ball like this.
But that could happen, and
it's the most important case.
So let's just imagine
that each of these Xi's
lives in one ball like this.
OK.
Now, we're going to think
of this as a smaller version
of our original problem.
In our original problem,
we had a set of directions,
and we needed them to
be 1 over r separated
because two directions that
are too close together,
they look equivalent.
And now that we have
this smaller ball,
our set of directions are not
1 over little r separated.
So here's the key point.
Set of directions is
1 over r separated,
but it is not 1 over
little r separated.
All right.
So if you think of it in terms
of the fibers of the projection
map, you would see some tubes.
So maybe that.
Maybe this is one
of our directions.
And you see that
there's a fiber that's
a tube with a lot
of points in it.
And maybe there's another
direction in our projection
that looks something like that.
And this is a different,
noticeably different direction
if you're looking
at the big ball,
and it has a different
set of points in it.
But if you're looking
just within this cell,
these two tubes or
these two directions
are indistinguishable.
OK.
So in order to study our
original problem, in order
to study what's going
on within this cell,
we can't really use all
of these directions.
We have to use the
inequivalent ones.
So Di is let's say D--
so let's say that theta 1
is equivalent to theta 2
if theta 1 minus theta
2 is less than 1 over r.
And then Di is going to
be D up to equivalence.
This is not exactly an
equivalence relation,
but anyway.
We pick a subset
of the directions
so that there's only one of
them in each 1 over r arc.
Maybe it's better to say that.
So we choose Di inside of D so
that Di intersect an arc smaller
than 1 for each arc gamma in
the circle of length 1 over r.
And now we have a smaller
set of directions.
OK.
So double counting.
Double counting still
helps, still works well.
If it were to happen that
Di was bigger than Xi.
That's still true,
just like before.
But the key difference
between the original problem
and this version with unit balls
is that in the original problem,
when we looked at a smaller
piece of it in the cell Oi,
we had many fewer
points, but we still had
the same number of directions.
So if the cell was small enough,
the number of points in the cell
would drop below the
number of directions,
and then the double counting
would give a very good bound.
But now, when I go
into a smaller cell,
I have fewer points, but I
also have fewer directions.
And so it's not clear whether
I'm making any progress.
To check whether
you're making progress,
you have to write down carefully
how these things are changing.
And I won't do the
whole computation,
but I'll tell you what happens.
So if X and D are Hausdorff,
and so X is R to the alpha,
so X is alpha dimensional,
and D is R to the beta,
or D is beta dimensional,
then what you'll find
is that Xi is little
r to the alpha.
So the radius little
R would depend
on how much we chop things up.
If I take a finer
cell decomposition,
little r will get smaller.
So it's essentially a free
parameter that I can choose.
Xi will be like
little r to the alpha,
and Di will be
little r to the beta.
So if alpha was bigger
than beta initially,
so I had many more points
than directions, which
is the interesting in case,
after I look at a smaller cell,
alpha will still be
bigger than beta,
so I still have many more
points than directions.
So I won't ever get
to a place where I
can apply this double counting.
OK.
Now having said
that, I think there
are some situations where
this method would give
something new and interesting.
So in particular, when
we did this computation,
it was predicated on
having equalities here.
And if we had strong
inequalities here, then
something more
favorable would happen,
and we might get an
interesting estimate.
I don't think this has ever
been written down carefully.
So Tom Wolff tried really
hard to understand this,
and I'm sure he thought
through everything that I just
presented.
But I guess the
answers didn't turn out
sufficiently positive for him
to write it up as a paper.
And I don't think anyone else
has really systematically done
it.
So also, it could
be a good project
to see how much does cell
decomposition tell us.
OK.
Now, there is also an example
that's worth mentioning.
Why being able to cut
things into pieces
doesn't necessarily let us--
OK.
So this was, OK, so there's
also an example that
matches the story that
I was just telling
about how this proof would go.
And the example goes
back to the beginning
of the class when
we were noticing,
when we were doing projection
theory and finite fields,
that it makes a difference
whether you have a prime field
or whether you have a
field with subfields.
And that is also true for this
problem that's on the board
here.
It's different over
the real numbers
versus the complex numbers,
because the complex numbers
have a nice subfield,
the real numbers.
So let me end by
mentioning that example.
Actually, are there any
questions or comments
before I do that last example.
OK.
So to end the class,
I'll mention this example
over the complex numbers.
OK.
So in this setup, X
is a set of unit balls
in the ball of radius R in C2.
So, this ball, you can think of
C2 for the moment as being R4.
So this ball has a volume,
which is like R to the fourth.
Now we're going to
consider some projections.
And I think a good way to
write it is pi t of Z1 Z2
is Z1 plus t Z2.
So in this story, Z1 and Z2
and t are all complex numbers.
So these are
complex projections.
And they're parameterized
by a complex number
t, which maybe we can think
of as being in the unit ball.
So D is contained in the
unit ball in the space
of complex numbers.
And it's 1 over R separated.
OK.
And then we can define SXD and
NXR and ND rho and Hausdorff
as usual.
All those definitions translate
in a straightforward way
to the complex setting.
And now the example,
basically, is
that the set X is basically
R2, the real points,
and the set of directions are
going to be the real directions.
So X is a set of unit
balls with centers in R2,
and they're sitting in the ball
of radius R. So the size of X
would be like R squared.
Or R squared kind of
real balls among R
to the fourth complex balls.
And our set of
directions is going
to be contained in the
real part of the ball.
And they're 1 over R separated.
So our set of directions
will have size R.
So now if I take a real
point Z1, Z1 and Z2 are real,
and I take a real
projection, so t is real,
then that will be real.
So all of the projections of
all of the centers of the balls
will be real.
The balls are still
complex, so they stick out
a little bit in the imaginary
direction, but not very much.
So if t is in D and I take pi
t of X, what does it look like?
Here's the complex plane.
Here's a ball of radius R.
And it will look like this.
And this height will
only be 1 because this
will consist of lots of unit
balls whose centers are real.
So we can conclude that
S of XD is around R.
OK.
So this example badly
violates this conjecture,
showing that the
conjecture is not
true over the complex numbers.
And this example, so we had
some simpler things that we did
know how to prove
over the reals.
We had double counting and
we had the Fourier method.
Those work over the
complex numbers.
And this example is sharp
for both of those things.
And in this example,
you do kind of have--
so you could ask, are
there cell decompositions
over the complex numbers?
It is a slightly
tricky question.
The way we built cell
decompositions did look special
for the real numbers
because we took a variety,
the zero set of a
polynomial, and cut it out,
and that decomposed
space into pieces.
And here we're working
over the complex numbers.
If you take the zero set
of a complex polynomial
and cut it out, it does not
divide space into pieces.
If you take the zero set of a
real polynomial and cut it out,
it does divide
space into pieces,
but it doesn't
necessarily interact well
with complex projections.
But in spite of that,
there is, with work,
a decent cell decomposition
theory over C.
And the main thing is
that it's easy to see
that for this
particular example,
you could divide it into
pieces in a nice way by hand,
and the pieces would have all
the properties of the cell
decomposition that
you would have in R2.
So that goes to show that even
though this theorem looks a lot
like the
Szemerédi-Trotter theorem,
and we have a proof of the
we're going to need to approach
this theorem very differently,
because the cell decomposition
method applies equally well
to this example, which is
a counterexample to it,
which does not
match our theorem.
So to make progress
towards this,
we have to think about the issue
of whether a field has subfields
and things like
that, and try to take
advantage of that to improve the
bounds over something like this.